Methods
This data was collected to describe the effectiveness of the 2018 pilot Suisun Marsh Salinity Control Gate study. This is a derived dataset made up of subsets of several long-term monitoring programs’ data sets, along with some data collected specifically for the study. 

Methods to derive ‘Delta_outflow_2018.csv’
Daily flow data estimating the net freshwater outflow from the Delta to the SFE were accessed at the California Natural Resources Agency’s data portal  https://data.cnra.ca.gov/dataset/dayflow. DAYFLOW is a water balance model run by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR) that estimates the daily average outflow from the Delta. The DAYFLOW output, known as the Net Delta Outflow Index (NDOI), is used for many regulatory and operational purposes. DAYFLOW estimates NDOI based on flow measurements and model estimates as described in the DAYFLOW documentation (https://data.cnra.ca.gov/dataset/06ee2016-b138-47d7-9e85-f46fae674536/resource/776b90ca-673e-4b56-8cf3-ec26792708c3/download/current-dayflow-documentation.pdf). It can be roughly interpreted as the difference between Delta inflows and water exports. Water Year Index and Water Year Type classifications are calculated by the DWR’s cooperative Snow Surveys based on measured unimpared runoff for the Sacramento Valley. For details see: https://cdec.water.ca.gov/reportapp/javareports?name=WSIHIST

Methods to derive ‘WaterQuality_SMSCG_2018.csv’
Water Quality data were collected by DWR’s Suisun Marsh branch and Environmental Monitoring program via stationary water quality probes deployed at Collinsville, National Steel, and Hunter Cut. Continuous water quality measurements were taken using Yellow Springs International (YSI) EXO2 multi-parameter water quality probes. The probes were used to measure temperature, turbidity, specific conductivity, and chlorophyll fluorescence at 15-minute intervals during the July-October period, in accordance with DWR’s QAQC protocols (CITATION).  These data are telemetered to DWR’s California Data Exchange Center (CDEC). To derive the dataset, we downloaded the data from CDEC, performed outlier detections, and calculated daily means for Salinity, Temperature, Turbidity, and Chlorophyll Fluorescence.

Methods to derive ‘EDSMsmelt_summer_2018.csv”:
Since 2016, the US Fish and Wildlife Service’s Enhanced Delta Smelt Monitoring Program (EDSM) (https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/98bce400502fae3a6b77b3e96f6d51e7), conducts Kodiak trawls to monitor Delta Smelt throughout the upper San Francisco Estuary (United States Fish and Wildlife Service et al. 2019). The Kodiak trawl had maximum mouth dimensions of 1.83 m x 7.62 m, with a body consisting of five panels of mesh starting with 5.1-cm stretch near the net mouth and decreasing to 0.3 cm stretch before the cod end, which was attached to a live box. Over the course of a week, field crews sample between 18 and 37 random sites, stratified by region of the estuary. During each weekly survey period a Kodiak trawl crew sampled 3-4 sites per day with a minimum of 2 tows per site. If no Delta Smelt were captured in the first two tows, up to four additional samples were taken. For each tow, the total number of Delta Smelt was counted, measured, and individuals were saved for future research. The results for each weekly sampling period and region were summarized based on catch per site (CPUE) for each sampling region. 

Methods to derive ‘TNSsmelt_2001_2018.csv”:
Because EDSM did not begin sampling until 2016, we used the California Department of Fish and Wildlife’s Summer Townet Survey (TNS) to evaluate historic smelt catch during August in Suisun Marsh. Data for the TNS was downloaded from the CDFW website (ftp://ftp.wildlife.ca.gov/TownetFallMidwaterTrawl/) and subset to include only data from stations within Suisun Marsh (stations numbers 606, 609, and 610) in August from 2001-2017. The townet has two sections; the first is made of 1/2" stretch, knotted, nylon, mesh 6' long, tapering down to an additional 2' "fyke". This "fyke" fits entirely within the second section, a 9' section of woven mesh with approximately 8 holes per inch. Please see the link at right for a diagram of the townet. The entire net measures approximately 15' in total, and is lashed directly to a fixed metal "D" frame. The "D" frame is in turn mounted on a 22 pound sled. Since 2005, a modified Clarke-Bumpus net and housing have been attached to the top of the "D" frame to sample mesozooplankton prey availability during one of the fish tows at each station. Two 10 minute stepped oblique tows are performed at each station. At historic stations, a third tow is conducted if any fish are captured during the first two tows. STN enumerates all fishes and several invertebrate species. Fork length is measured to the nearest millimeter for all striped bass, all delta smelt, and the first 50 fish per tow for all other species. We converted electrical conductivity measured by the sampling crew using a multi-parameter YSI sonde to salinity using the ‘ec2pss’ function from the ‘wql’ package in Program R (Jassby et al. 2017). 

Methods to produce ‘plankton_2018_smscg.csv’:
Zooplankton and Microcystis sampling relied on data from several long-term boat-based sampling programs, all of which are available as in integrated data set on EDI (Bashevkin, 2020) (Bashevkin et al. 2020). The Interagency Ecological Program’s Environmental Monitoring Program (EMP) (http://www.water.ca.gov/iep/activities/emp.cfm), which collects zooplankton samples on a monthly basis at fixed sites throughout the upper SFE  (Hennessy 2019); California Department of Fish and Wildlife’s Summer Townet Survey (STN) (https://www.wildlife.ca.gov/Conservation/Delta/Townet-Survey), which collects zooplankton and fish samples at fixed sites on a biweekly basis in July and August; and the Fall Midwater Trawl (FMWT) (https://www.wildlife.ca.gov/Conservation/Delta/Fall-Midwater-Trawl), which operates on a monthly basis in September-December and also collects zooplankton samples in addition to fish sampling at fixed sites in the study area. Sampling methods were similar between surveys. For each zooplankton sample, an 85 cm long, 12.5 cm diameter zooplankton net made of 0.16 mm nylon mesh was attached to a steel sampling sled and towed through the water in a stepwise oblique manner for ten minutes to sample the entire water column. A General Oceanics model 2030 flowmeter was fixed in the mouth of the net to calculate water volume sampled. Samples were preserved in 10% formalin and subsamples were identified by taxonomists at CDFW’s laboratory in Stockton, CA. Catch per cubic meter of water sampled (CPUE) was calculated based on volume of water passing through the net as measured by the flowmeter. CPUE was converted to biomass per cubic meter (BPUE) by using published conversion factors (Dumont et al. 1975, Rian and Stephen 2004, Kimmerer et al. 2011).

Data from the integrated dataset were subset to include only samples collected during summer and fall of 2018 in Suisun Marsh and the River region. We combined BPUE for lower taxonomic groups and life stages to seven main groups: Acartiella spp., Tortanus spp., Pseudodiaptomus spp., Limnoithona spp., Other Calanoid Copepods, other Cyclopoid Copepods, and Other Zooplankton.

Microcystis presence was assessed visually by survey personnel concurrently with zooplankton and fish sampling. At each sampling event, a bucket of water was collected and presence of Microcystis colonies was ranked on a scale of 1-5, with 1 being “absent” and 5 being “very high”. 


Methods to produce ‘salinity_modeled_2018.csv’ and “Percent_time_lt6psu_100mGrid_UTM_2018Action_01_Summer Operation.asc”

The salinity field in Suisun Marsh and Suisun Bay with and without a SMSCG action in 2018 was modeled by by Aaron Bever and Michael McWilliams of Anchor QEA (https://www.anchorqea.com/) using the UnTRIM Bay-Delta Model. The UnTRIM Bay-Delta model is a three-dimensional hydrodynamic model of San Francisco Bay and the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta (MacWilliams et al. 2015) developed using the UnTRIM hydrodynamic model (Casulli and Zanolli 2002, Casulli and Zanolli 2005). The UnTRIM Bay-Delta model extends from the Pacific Ocean through the entire Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta. Tidal and non-tidal water levels, salinity, and water temperature are applied at the Pacific Ocean open boundary. The UnTRIM Bay-Delta model includes spatially varying meteorology, freshwater inflow from tributaries to the Bay and Delta, and water exports/intakes throughout the system.  Water control structures, such as gates and temporary barriers, are also included in the model.  The UnTRIM Bay-Delta model has been calibrated using water level, water flow, and salinity data collected in the SFE in numerous previous studies (Kimmerer et al. 2009, MacWilliams et al. 2015) and was validated for the 2018 Flow Action period using observed water level, salinity, and temperature data collected in the study area.   

Because the hydrodynamic model domain is significantly larger than the study area in Suisun Marsh and both the upstream flows and ocean water levels are unaffected by the Flow Action, all boundary conditions remained identical for the historical simulation of the Flow Action and the corresponding scenario that did not include the Flow Action, such that only the SMSCG gate operation and Delta exports specified in the model varied between the scenarios. In the hydrodynamic model, the SMSCG was operated following the same schedule and operational triggers used by the California Department of Water Resources to operate the physical facility.  The SMSCG is represented by three grid cells in the model:  one representing flashboards, one representing the radial gates, and one representing the boat lock and jetty on the eastern side of Montezuma Slough.   The width of each grid cell corresponds to the width of each SMSCG component.  Flow through the boat lock is represented using a rating curve.  During the period when the flashboards are in place, water flow is not allowed through the water grid cell representing the flashboards.

Simulated salinity and temperature with and without the Flow Action in the flow area were then summarized for the periods before, during, and after the Flow Action.  Hydrodynamic model results from the simulation with the Flow Action were compared to results from the simulation without the Flow Action, to estimate the effects of the Flow Action on salinity and temperature.  Time series were extracted from the model to evaluate salinity and temperature through time at Belden’s Landing (salinity_modeled_2018.csv).  Depth-averaged salinity and temperature at each model grid cell were time-averaged for the period of the Flow Action and the period following the Flow Action and the percent of time the depth-averaged salinity was less than 6 psu at each model grid cell was also calculated for both simulations, visualize the change resulting from the Flow Action (.asc files).  


References 
Bashevkin, S. M., R. Hartman, M. Thomas, A. Barros, C. Burdi, A. Hennessy, T. Tempel, and K. K. . 2020. Interagency Ecological Program: Zooplankton abundance in the Upper San Francisco Estuary from 1972-2018, an integration of 5 long-term monitoring programs ver 1. Environmental Data Initiative. .
Casulli, V., and P. Zanolli. 2002. Semi-implicit numerical modeling of nonhydrostatic free-surface flows for environmental problems. Mathematical and Computer Modelling 36:1131-1149.
Casulli, V., and P. Zanolli. 2005. High resolution methods for multidimensional advection–diffusion problems in free-surface hydrodynamics. Ocean Modelling 10:137-151.
Dumont, H. J., I. Van de Velde, and S. Dumont. 1975. The dry weight estimate of biomass in a selection of Cladocera, Copepoda and Rotifera from the plankton, periphyton and benthos of continental waters. Oecologia 19:75-97.
Hennessy, A. 2019. Zooplankton Meta Data. IEP Bay-Delta Monitoring and Analysis Section, Department of Water Resources, Sacramento, CA.
Jassby, A., J. Cloern, and J. Stachelek. 2017. Package wql, Exploring Water Quality Monitoring Data. Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN).
Kimmerer, W., T. Ignoffo, and L. Sullivan. 2011. Length, weight, carbon, and nitrogen content of the common copepods in the San Francisco Estuary. Romberg Tiburon Center, San Francisco State University, Tiburon, CA.
Kimmerer, W. J., E. S. Gross, and M. L. MacWilliams. 2009. Is the response of estuarine nekton to freshwater flow in the San Francisco Estuary explained by variation in habitat volume? Estuaries and Coasts 32:375-389.
MacWilliams, M. L., A. J. Bever, E. S. Gross, G. S. Ketefian, and W. J. Kimmerer. 2015. Three-dimensional modeling of hydrodynamics and salinity in the San Francisco estuary: An evaluation of model accuracy, X2, and the low–salinity zone. San Francisco Estuary and Watershed Science 13.
Rian, C. H., and M. B. Stephen. 2004. Functional response and potential predatory impact of Tortanus dextrilobatus, a carnivorous copepod recently introduced to the San Francisco Estuary. Marine Ecology Progress Series 277:167-179.
United States Fish and Wildlife Service, C. Johnston, S. Lee, B. Mahardja, J. Speegle, and D. Barnard. 2019. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service: San Francisco Estuary Enhanced Delta Smelt Monitoring Program data, 2016-2019 ver 1. Environmental Data Initiative.

